And this is the theory that there will
be computers that are smarter than the
sum of humans.
Because remember, the computers are now
doing self-improvement. They're learning
how to plan and they don't have to
listen to us anymore.
We call that super intelligence or ASI,
artificial super intelligence. And this
is the theory that there will be
computers that are smarter than the sum
of humans.
The San Francisco convent consensus is
this occurs within six years just based
on scaling. Now in order to pull this
off, you have to have an enormous amount
of power. I was here yesterday
testifying about this, you know, and we
need like I can talk at some length
about how many gigawatts and how many
nuclear power plants and all the kind of
stuff we can talk about separately.
This path is not understood in our
society. There's no language for what
happens with the arrival of this. I
wrote a book on this with Henry
Kissinger called Genesis which you know
I recommend obviously um because I wrote
it available on available available in
your usual places. Um but the important
point is this is happening faster than
our human that our society our democracy
our laws will address and there's lots
of implications.
The vast majority of programmers will be
replaced by AI programmers.
We also believe that within one year you
will have graduate level mathematicians
that are at the tippy top of graduate
math programs. There's lots of reasons
to think this is going to happen. This
is the consensus. You go. Okay. Well,
that's pretty interesting. Now, I can't
do that kind of math. Very few people
can do that math. How can the computer
do that math better than anybody else?
To some degree, it's because math has a
simpler language than human language. So
the way these algorithms actually work
is they're doing essentially word
prediction. So you take you take a p a
sentence, you take a word out, and then
it learns how to put the correct word
back in. This is called the loss
function, and it's optimized to do that
at a scale that's unimaginable to us as
humans. So you do the same thing for
math, but there you use a conjecture and
then a proof format through a protocol
called lean. In programming, it's pretty
simple. You just keep writing code until
you pass the programming test.
So strangely the first question I always
ask programmers is what language do you
program in? And the correct answer is it
doesn't matter because you're trying to
design for an outcome. You don't care
what code is generated by the computer.
This is a whole new world. Okay.
So that's one year. Okay. What happens
in two years? Well, I've just told you
about reasoning and I've told you about
programming and I've told you about
math. Programming plus math are the
basis of sort of our whole digital
world. So the evidence and the claims
from the research groups in open AAI and
and anthropic and so forth is that
they're now somewhere around 10 or 20%
of the code that they're developing in
their research programs is being
generated by the computer. That's called
recursive self-improvement is the
technical term. So what happens when
this thing starts to scale? Well, a lot.
One way to say this is that within three
to five years, we'll have what is called
general intelligence, AGI, which can be
defined as a system that is as smart as
the smartest mathematician, physicist,
you know, artist, writer, thinker,
politician, maybe not in the same level,
um, but you get the idea. Uh, just the
creative industries and so forth. But
imagine that in one computer. Okay.
Well, that's pretty interesting. I call
this, by the way, the San Francisco
consensus because everyone who believes
this is in San Francisco. It may be the
water. What happens when every single
one of us has the equivalent of the
smartest human on every problem in our
pocket? So, it means you have the best
architect when you have an architecture
problem. Another thing that's going on
is the development of agentic solutions
and agents are refer to systems that
have input and output in memory and they
learn.
Fore! Foreign! Foreign!
MCP cloud code open codex cli
google an example here is that I want to
uh buy another house uh I happen to like
Virginia I grew up in Virginia I say
find me a house in the greater MLAN
area. Look at the that's one agent. Look
at all the rules. Figure out how big a
house I can build. That's another agent.
Do the transaction to buy the land.
That's another agent. Design the house
with a human architect, right? But sort
of ignore them for most of the thing,
but they have to sign it off and then I
approve it and then find the contractor,
right? Hire the contractor, pay the
bills, and at the end sue the contractor
for lack of performance.
Okay, now I just gave you the stupidest
possible explanation. I just
described every business process, every
government process and every and every
sort of academic process in our nation.
Fore! Foreign! Foreign!
years ago. The jobs are changed, but
more jobs are created than destroyed. In
this case, you'd have to convince me
that this time is different. If you look
in Asia where they for whatever reason
are choosing not to have children, the
Asian reproduction rate is in the order
of 1.0 or lower. So they're rapidly
disappearing. So the Asian countries are
very very quickly automating. The tools
that I'm describing will allow the few
humans that will be working very hard in
30 or 40 years if these trends continue.
The rest of us will be dependent on
those hardworking humans. It'll make
their productivity more much greater.
Talking to to the Chinese about AI with
Henry and this means we are alive and
we're listening to you. Thank you very
much. Right. That's not what they're
doing anymore. When the when Deep Seek
showed up and our stock market lost a
trillion dollars in one day, all of a
sudden they began to understand the
scale of what it was. So now there is a
massive program in China to accelerate
these things. I had thought Illy and I
and some of the other people in this
room worked really hard on these um chip
controls and the chip controls have been
um in my view largely effective. How did
China get around them? Well, some of it
was straightforward theft and evasion of
the tariffs, but they also they're
sufficiently smart. They created new
algorithms that use different kinds of
computing to move forward because they
because China operates in open source
that is they they release the software
to everyone. There are two things that
happened. We we Americans immediately
saw their idea and incorporated in our
own. So thank you very much China you
invented something new. We immediately
incorporated it. But
second, because it's free, the
proliferation issues around Chinese
models have now become a very big deal.
And our government is trying to figure
out uh without success so far how to
handle this question. It's a very tricky
question. We call these wicked hard
problems.
Let me tell you how I would start. Just
to give you a heads up, the first thing
I would do is to try to steal your
intellectual property and the people.
Check. Okay. And you're such a good lady
that you've managed to prevent me from
doing that. The next thing I'm going to
do is use my AI, which is almost as good
as yours, to go into your eye. These are
called adversarial attacks. And modify
your system. Yeah. and you go, "No way."
Because we have such great
cryptologologists. We're so far ahead of
you are that six months we anticipated
this. What's my next move? I bomb your
data
center. But think about it. We're having
this whole debate in our nation about
what to do about Iran's nuclear program.
And I'm not an expert in that, but these
are the kind of conversations that
happen here in in DC. So when we get to
the point where China is n months ahead,
are we willing to bomb their data
centers? My favorite example here is I
was in I've been working on this. I was
talking to somebody said, "The answer is
obvious." I said,
"What? The good lady and the bad guy. We
agree to a treaty where each of us puts
dynamite on each other's
uh electricity supply. You get to blow
up my electricity if you get mad and I
get to blow up your electricity if I get
you get the idea. Now, some would say
we've already done that's already
happened. Well, kinetic attack on
people's data centers is probably an act
of war. Yeah. So, this is the kind of
thinking that people are be and
obviously that that proposal is
rejected. I'm not I'm using it as an
example. It's not going to happen. But
this is an example of where the
proliferation issues and technically
this is called the eye of the needle
problem. You have to get through this
eye of the needle without killing
yourself and killing everybody else to
get to this promised land of
AI. Americans understand why this is
important. Um I'm the primary funer of a
particular group that has built a model.
model. It first learned how to do
chemistry and uh it was trained as a
foundation model for chemistry and it's
attached to a robotic lab. And what this
model does is it generates hypothesis
for drugs of one kind or another. And it
just generates them. God knows if
they're right. And then overnight the
robotic lab tests them and gives the
report overnight and then it starts
again. And the reason I'm mentioning
this is this is the future model of the
fusion of AI and bio, right? The AI
system generates all sorts of candidates
to reduce the u essentially the um
search space. If you think about it
algorithmically, it's an exponential
with too many degrees of exponential. So
you have to come up with some way of
reducing the space. So this particular
group is using AI to reduce the space,
run the things and so forth. Their
objective, we'll see if they pull it
off. This is a research project, is to
identify all human druggable tar targets
within the next two years. If that
occurs, then that information goes
straight into the drug industry. Now,
it's a different way of thinking. And
it's profound in that it gives them the
targets they need to go build drugs
against. That's interesting to me. It's
the combi combination of AI and a
robotic lab that does something in a wet
lab essentially. So, one model that you
should think about is wet labs will be
roboticized and the wet labs will have
AR they're essentially they're not
humanoid robots they're arm robots and
they go boom boom boom they and they do
the pipetting and so forth and so on and
they do it 24 hours a day. That's a
major change in the way bio bio the
biotech industry works.
Show
me. Hello. Uh, greetings Dr. Schmidt.
Uh, many background. I'm a recent PhD in
biomedical engineering. Very excited
I've been following you. Just a very
quick question. Do you think there's
implications for ASI via drug discovery
for like curing cancer and or
personalized medicine? Just something um
yes because under the under the
assumptions of super intelligence, these
are systems that see things that we
don't see. And so the assumption is that
ASI for example could understand
biological and cellular mechanisms that
you are an expert in and I'm not at a
level that humans will not. So that's
why this is such a big deal. We've
always assumed that humans would know
there would be at least one human right
we call these people polymaths that
would understand these things. We're
going to end up in a world maybe 10
years from now where we won't actually
understand why but you as our scientist
will say I use it every day when I when
I was at college I was studying quantum
physics and my friend who was a graduate
student who was much better than I and I
said is this stuff actually
true you know it's like too weird to be
true and he said yes we use it every day
and I imagine in 10 years some young
student will come up to you and say is
this stuff true and you'll say,
"Frankly, I use it every day. No human
understands
it." What an interesting situation for
you as now a senior researcher 10 years
from now to have to deal with.